The President:
Thank you, guys. Thank you. Thank you very
much. Thank you. Everybody please have a seat.
Thank you. Listen, you guys had to listen
to me at the State of the Union -- or at least
pretend to listen to me.
(laughter)
So I'll try to keep it relatively brief, some
opening remarks and then open it up for questions.
First of all, I just want to thank Harry Reid.
(applause)
I recently said he's got one of the toughest
jobs in Washington -- managing an institution
that by its very nature is, let's face it,
you guys are a little difficult to manage.
I've been a part of this caucus. I really
don't think anybody could have done a better
job under more trying circumstances than Harry
Reid. And I think he deserves a huge round
of applause.
(applause)
Now, let me start by saying we always knew
this was going to be a difficult year to govern
-- an extraordinarily difficult year to govern.
We began 2009 with a financial system on the
brink of collapse, an economy bleeding nearly
700,000 jobs per month, a $1.3 trillion deficit,
and two wars that were costly in every sense
of the word. We knew that solutions wouldn't
come easily or come quickly. We knew that
the right decisions would be tough and sometimes
they would be unpopular. And we knew that
we might have to make them sometimes without
any help from our friends on the other side
of the aisle. But we made those decisions.
We led. Those actions prevented another Great
Depression; they broke the back of a severe
recession. The economy that was shrinking
by 6 percent a year ago is now growing at
nearly 6 percent one year later.
(applause)
That's because of the work that you did. Harry
listed some of the work that you did on behalf
of the American people, even under these difficult
circumstances: extending health insurance
to 4 million children, protecting consumers
from getting ripped off by their credit card
companies, and kids being targeted by big
tobacco. Some things that weren't noted or
didn't get a lot of attention: You reformed
defense spending by eliminating waste, and
saved taxpayers billions while keeping us
safe at the same time. You gave billions of
dollars of tax relief to small businesses
and 95 percent of working families here in
America. You did all this despite facing enormous
procedural obstacles that are unprecedented.
You may have looked at these statistics. You
had to cast more votes to break filibusters
last year than in the entire 1950s and '60s
combined. That's 20 years of obstruction packed
into just one. But you didn't let it stop
you. As Harry mentioned, though, our mission
is far from accomplished, because while the
worst of the storm has passed, far too many
Americans are still hurting in its wake. I
know you've seen it back home in the shuttered
businesses, the foreclosed homes; you've heard
it from constituents who are desperate for
work; and we've seen it in the burdens that
families have been grappling with long since
this recession hit -- issues that we've been
talking about now for years: the burden of
working harder and longer for less, of being
unable to save enough to retire or to help
kids with college expenses, the extraordinarily
constant rising costs of health care. Those
problems haven't gone away. It's still our
responsibility to address them. All that's
changed in the last two weeks is that our
party has gone from having the largest Senate
majority in a generation to the second largest
Senate majority in a generation. And we've
got to remember that. There was apparently
a headline after the Massachusetts election;
the Village Voice announced that Republicans
win a 41-59 majority.
(laughter)
It's worth thinking about. We still have to
lead. Saving and creating jobs have to continue
to be our focus in 2010. Last year, we gave
small business -- the engines of job creation
-- tax relief, and expanded lending through
the SBA. I don't know if you are aware that
SBA loans have gone up 70, 80 percent, which,
by the way, indicates the degree to which
there is still huge demand among small businesses.
Some of the banks are saying, well, we're
not lending because there's not as much demand
out there. There are a lot of small businesses
that are hungry for loans out there right
now. And we've made progress but they're still
struggling. So I've proposed additional ideas
to help small businesses start up and hire,
to raise wages and expand, and to get the
credit they need to stay afloat. You've made
some of these same proposals, as well. We
should put them into action without delay.
(applause)
We've invested
in America's infrastructure, rebuilding roads
and bridges, and ports and railways, and putting
people to work strengthening our communities
and our country. And as you know, the Recovery
Act was designed so that a lot of that work
is going to be taking place this year, not
just last year. Many of the projects you funded
come online in the next six months. But we
can do more, and we should do so without delay.
Through the investments you made in clean
energy startups, we've not only helped put
Americans to work, we're on track to double
our nation's capacity to generate renewable
energy over the next few years. I've proposed
additional tax credits that will promote private
sector hiring and energy conservation. We
should do that without delay. I think ideas
like this should be pretty palatable to the
other party. They seem pretty common sense,
pretty centrist. We should be able to hear
their ideas as well. That's why I spoke to
the Republican caucus last Friday. I think
it was to the country's benefit that we had
an open and frank discussion about the challenges
facing the American people and our ideas to
solve them.
(applause)
I got to admit, I had a little fun at that
caucus.
(laughter)
Now, obviously, on some issues, we didn't
agree. But on some, we did. And I'm reminded
that when it came to health insurance reform
in particular, I sought out and supported
Republican ideas from the start -- so did
you. Max Baucus -- where's Max? I think he
can testify to spending a little time listening
to Republican ideas. So can Chris Dodd and
Tom Harkin. You considered hundreds of Republican
amendments, and incorporated many of their
ideas into the legislation that passed the
Senate. So when I start hearing that we should
accept Republican ideas, let's be clear -- we
have. What hasn't happened is the other side
accepting our ideas. And I told them, I want
to work together when we can, and I meant
it. I believe that's the best way to get things
done for the American people. But I also made
it clear that we'll call them out when they
say they want to work with us and we extend
a hand and get a fist in return. Last week,
for example, you put up for a vote a bill
I supported -- Conrad-Gregg fiscal commission.
We were sure this was going to be bipartisan,
only to see seven Republicans who co-sponsored
the idea in the first place suddenly decide
to vote against it. Now, I'm open to honest
differences of opinion. But what I'm not open
to is changing positions solely because it's
good short-term politics. And what I'm not
open to is a decision to stay on the sidelines
and then assign blame. I've little patience
for the kinds of political calculation that
says the cost of blocking everything is less
than the cost of passing nothing; that basically
says "If they lose, I win." That's been the
politics in Washington for too long, and the
problem is it leaves the American people out
of the equation. So I would just suggest to
this caucus, if anybody is searching for a
lesson from Massachusetts, I promise you the
answer is not to do nothing. The American
people are out of patience with business as
usual. They're fed up with a Washington that
has become so absorbed with who's up and who's
down that we've lost sight of how they're
doing. They want us to start worrying less
about keeping our jobs and more about helping
them keep their jobs. And they want to see
their business done in an open and transparent
way. When we took back the Senate in 2007,
we did so in part because we made a case that
we'd be better on ethics and transparency.
And we backed that up by passing the most
sweeping ethics reforms since Watergate and
by beginning to address earmark abuse. We
should be proud of those accomplishments.
But if we're going to erase that deficit of
trust that I mentioned at the State of the
Union, we're still going to have to do more.
That's why I've proposed that we work together
to make all earmark requests public, on one
central Web site, before they come up for
a vote; and to require lobbyists to discuss
details of their contacts on behalf of their
clients with the administration or with Congress.
That's why, working with people like Dick
Durbin, who's been vocal on this for a long
time, we've got to confront the gaping loophole
that the Supreme Court recently opened in
our campaign finance laws that allowed special
interests to spend without limit to influence
American elections. We've also got to get
back to fiscal responsibility. And I spoke
about this at the State of the Union. Just
10 years ago, America had a budget surplus
of over $200 billion. Remember, people were
worried about what might happen with all these
surpluses, and whether it would create problems
in the financial markets. That was just a
decade ago. After two wars, two tax cuts,
prescription drug program -- none of which
were paid for -- we faced a deficit of over
$1 trillion, a debt over the next decade of
$8 trillion, before my administration spent
a single dollar. Now, we can't change the
past, but we can change the future. That's
why I'm asking you to adopt a freeze in non-security
discretionary spending for the next three
years, starting next year. We're still having
a tough time right now, given the economy
is just starting to pick up steam -- but starting
next year. That's why I'm grateful that all
of you restored the PAYGO rules that worked
so well in the 1990s. I already mentioned
the fiscal commission. We may not have been
able to get the votes for a statutory commission,
but we're going to -- I am going to appoint
a commission by executive order, because it's
important for us to take these issues seriously
-- not just for us but for our children and
our grandchildren. Let me just wrap up by
saying this. I know these are tough times
to hold public office. I'm there in the arena
with you. The need is great. The anger and
the anguish are intense. The economy is massive
and so, as a consequence, no matter what levers
and buttons we press, sometimes it doesn't
move as quickly as is needed to provide relief
to so many of our constituents. In that kind
of circumstance, I think the natural political
instinct is to tread lightly, keep your head
down, and to play it safe. I've said this
before to this caucus; I just want to say
it again. For me, it is constantly important
to remind myself why I got into this business
in the first place; why I'm willing to be
away from my family for big stretches at a
time; the financial sacrifices that so many
of you have made; being subject to criticism
constantly. You don't get in this for the
fame. You don't get in it for the title. You
get in it because somewhere in your background,
at some point in time, you decided there was
an issue that was so important that you were
willing to stand up and be counted. You were
going to fight for something. And you decided
you were going to run as a Democrat because
there was a core set of values within the
Democratic Party about making sure that everybody
had a fair shot, making sure that middle-class
folks were treated fairly in our economy,
making sure that those who were on the outside
had a way in that led you to get involved
in public service. And that's what we have
to remind ourselves, especially when it's
hard -- especially when it's hard. You look
at an issue right now like health care. So
many of us campaigned on the idea that we
were going to change this health care system.
So many of us looked people in the eye who
had been denied because of a preexisting condition,
or just didn't have health insurance at all,
or small business owners in our communities
who told us that their premiums had gone up
25 percent or 30 percent. And we said we were
going to change it. Well, here we are with
a chance to change it. And all of you put
extraordinary work last year into making serious
changes that would not only reform the insurance
industry, not only cover 30 million Americans,
but would also bend the cost curve, and save
a trillion dollars on our deficits, according
to the Congressional Budget Office. There's
a direct link between the work that you guys
did on that and the reason that you got into
public office in the first place. And so as
we think about moving forward, I hope we don't
lose sight of why we're here. We've got to
finish the job on health care.
(applause)
We've got to finish the job on financial regulatory
reform.
(applause)
We've got to finish the job even though it's
hard. And I'm absolutely confident that if
we do so in an open way, in a transparent
way, in a spirit that says to our political
opponents that we welcome their ideas, we
are open to compromise, but what we're not
willing to do is to give up on the basic notion
that this government can be responsive to
ordinary people and help give them a hand
up so they can achieve their American Dream
-- we will not give up that ideal.
(applause)
If that's where we go, I'm confident that
politics in 2010 will take care of themselves.
Harry, thank you very much. I'm going to turn
it over to questions. Thank you.
(applause)
Senator Reid:
First question, Arlen Specter. Let me tell
everyone people have come to me and indicated
they wanted to ask questions. We're taking
a list of those. Arlen Specter is first.
Senator Specter:
Mr. President, I begin by applauding your
decision to place the economy at the top of
the agenda, to put America back to work and
provide jobs, jobs, jobs. I have a two-part
question, and just a brief statement of the
issue. We have lost 2.3 million jobs as a
result of the trade imbalance with China between
2001 and 2007. The remedies to save those
jobs are very ineffective -- long delays,
proceedings before the International Trade
Commission, subject to being overruled by
the President. We have China violating international
law with subsidies and dumping -- really,
a form of international banditry. They take
our money and then they lend it back to us
and own now a big part of the United States.
The first part of my question is, would you
support more effective remedies to allow injured
parties -- unions which lose jobs, companies
which lose profits -- by endorsing a judicial
remedy, if not in U.S. courts perhaps in an
international court, and eliminate the aspect
of having the ITC decisions overruled by the
President -- done four times in 2003 to 2005,
at a cost of a tremendous number of jobs on
the basis of the national interest. And if
we have an issue on the national interest,
let the nation pay for it, as opposed to the
steel industry or the United Steel Workers.
And the second part of the question, related,
is when China got into the World Trade Organization,
a matter that 15 of us in this body opposed,
there were bilateral treaties. And China has
not lived up to its obligations to have its
markets open to us, but take our markets and
take our jobs. Would you support an effort
to revise, perhaps even revoke, those -- that
bilateral treaty, which gives China such an
unfair trade advantage? Thank you.
The President:
Arlen, I would not be in favor of revoking
the trade relationships that we've established
with China. I have shown myself during the
course of this year more than willing to enforce
our trade agreements in a much more serious
way. And at times I've been criticized for
it. There was a case involving foreign tires
that were being sent in here, and I said this
was an example of where we've got to put our
foot down and show that we're serious about
enforcement. And it caused the usual fuss
at the international level, but it was the
right thing to do. Having said that, I also
believe that our future is going to be tied
up with our ability to sell products all around
the world, and China is going to be one of
our biggest markets, and Asia is going to
be one of our biggest markets. And for us
to close ourselves off from that market would
be a mistake. The point you're making, Arlen,
which is the right one, is it's got to be
reciprocal. So if we have established agreements
in which both sides are supposed to open up
their markets, we do so and then the other
side is imposing a whole set of non-tariff
barriers in place, that's a problem. And it
has to be squarely confronted. So the approach
that we're taking is to try to get much tougher
about enforcement of existing rules, putting
constant pressure on China and other countries
to open up their markets in reciprocal ways.
One of the challenges that we've got to address
internationally is currency rates and how
they match up to make sure that our goods
are not artificially inflated in price and
their goods are artificially deflated in price.
That puts us at a huge competitive disadvantage.
But what I don't want to do is for us as a
country, or as a party, to shy away from the
prospects of international competition, because
I think we've got the best workers on Earth,
we've got the most innovative products on
Earth, and if we are able to compete on an
even playing field, nobody can beat us. And
by the way, that will create jobs here in
the United States. If we just increased our
exports to Asia by a percentage point, by
a fraction, it would mean hundreds of thousands,
maybe millions of jobs here in the United
States. And it's easily doable. And that's
why we are going to be putting a much bigger
emphasis on export promotion over the next
several years. And that includes, by the way,
export promotion not just for large companies
but also for medium-size and small companies,
because one of the challenges -- I was up
in New Hampshire yesterday, and you saw this
terrific new company that had just been started
up -- it's only got 13, 14 employees at this
point. But it has a new manufacturing technique
for the component parts in LED light bulbs,
potentially could lower the price of LED light
bulbs, cut them in half. And these folks,
they potentially could market not just here
in the United States, but this is a technology
that could end up being sent all around the
world. But they don't have the money to set
up their own foreign office in Beijing to
navigate through the bureaucracy. They've
got to have some help being over there. And
so that's one of the things that we really
want to focus on in this coming year, is making
sure that our export-import banks, our trade
offices, that we are assisting not just the
big guys, although we do want to help them,
but also the medium-sized and small businesses
that have innovative products that could be
marketed if they just got a little bit of
help and a little bit of push from the United
States government.
Senator Reid:
Sir, Michael Bennet, Colorado.
Senator Bennet:
Thanks for coming, Mr. President. It's good
to see you. You talked in the State of the
Union very well about a number of the challenges
that we face as a country, which are serious.
I mean, even before we were driven into the
worst recession since the Great Depression,
the last period of economic growth in this
country's history, was the first time middle-class
family income actually fell during a period
of economic growth; no net jobs created since
1998; household wealth the same at the end
of the decade as it was at the beginning;
and an education system that's not working
well enough for our kids. And on top of everything
else, got a $1.4 trillion deficit and $12
trillion of debt. I was saying that the other
day, by the way, in Colorado, and I was talking
about how our kids were going to have to pay
this back if we didn't make this decision
that we've got to face up to. And my daughter,
Caroline, who's 10, was there, and she walked
out with me at the end and she said, "Just
so you know, I'm not paying that back."
(laughter)
So she has the right attitude, I think.
The President:
But just in case you're counting on it.
(laughter)
Senator Bennet:
At the same time, this place looks broken
to the American people. Our ability to make
these decisions is open to enormous question
in the wake of the health care discussion,
in particular. I had a woman the other day
in Glenwood Springs, Colorado, ask me where
she could get her lobbyist in Washington,
D.C. What are we going to do differently?
What are you going to do differently? What
do we need to do differently as Democrats
and Republicans to fix this institution so
that our democracy can actually withstand
the test that we're facing right now?
The President:
Well, let me just make a couple observations,
having served in the Senate and now seeing
it from the perspective of the White House.
First of all, whenever people ask me, why
isn't Washington working -- I am a fierce
defender of the integrity and hard work of
individual members, which is, by the way,
matched up by --when you look at polls, people
hate Congress, but individual members a lot
of them feel are really working hard on their
behalf. So the problem here you've got is
an institution that increasingly is not adapted
to the demands of a hugely competitive 21st
century economy. I think the Senate in particular,
the challenge that I gave to Republicans and
I will continue to issue to Republicans is
if you want to govern then you can't just
say no. It can't just be about scoring points.
There are multiple examples during the course
of this year in which that's been the case.
Look, I mentioned the filibuster record. We've
had scores of pieces of legislation in which
there was a filibuster, cloture had to be
invoked, and then ended up passing 90 to 10,
or 80 to 15. And what that indicates is a
degree to which we're just trying to gum up
the works instead of getting business done.
That is an institutional problem. In the Senate,
the filibuster only works if there is a genuine
spirit of compromise and trying to solve problems,
as opposed to just shutting the place down.
If it's just shutting the place down, then
it's not going to work. That's point number
one. Point number two. In terms of what -- how
we operate, we as Democrats, I do think that
the more open we are, the more transparent
we are, the more people know exactly how things
are working even if sometimes it takes longer
to maintain that transparency, the better
off we are. And I think the health care bill
is a perfect example. And the truth of the
matter is, is that the process looked painful
and messy, but the innumerable hearings that
were held did give an opportunity for the
product to get refined so that I think that
the ultimate package, after potential negotiations
between the House and the Senate, is better
than where we started. And there was a possibility
and continues to be a possibility to be in
discussions with the American people about
what exactly that bill accomplishes. On the
other hand -- and I take some fault for this
-- at the end of the process when we were
fighting through all these filibusters and
trying to get it done quickly so that we could
pivot and start talking about other issues
that were so important to the American people,
some of that transparency got lost. And I
think we paid a price for it. And so it's
important, I think, to constantly have our
cards out on the table and welcome challenges
and welcome questions. If the Republicans
say that they can insure every American for
free, which it what was claimed the other
day, at no cost, I want to know. Because I
told them, I said, why would I want to get
a bunch of lumps on my head doing the hard
thing if you've got the easy thing? But you've
got to show me, you've got to prove to me
that it actually works -- because I've talked
to every health care expert out there and
it turns out if you want to reform the insurance
system, if you want to make sure that people
without preexisting conditions are able to
get insurance, if you want to provide coverage
for people, if you want to bend the cost curve,
then you need a comprehensive bill, because
this is a complicated area involving one-sixth
of our economy. But we should be open to that
dialogue, and not underestimate the power
of the American people, over time -- despite
millions of dollars of advertising to the
contrary from the insurance industry and others
-- we should not underestimate the American
people's willingness to say, okay, I got it.
And there are still going to be disagreements,
and some will disagree with us. But we've
got to constantly make our case, I think,
and not play an insider's game. Play an outsider's
game. Last point I would make about this.
You know what I think would actually make
a difference, Michael -- I think if everybody
here -- excuse all the members of the press
who are here -- if everybody here turned off
your CNN, your Fox, your -- just turn off
the TV -- MSNBC, blogs -- and just go talk
to folks out there, instead of being in this
echo chamber where the topic is constantly
politics -- the topic is politics. It is much
more difficult to get a conversation focused
on how are we going to help people than a
conversation about how is this going to help
or hurt somebody politically. And that's part
of what the American people are just sick
of -- because they don't care, frankly, about
majority and minorities and process and this
and that. They just want to know, are you
delivering for me? And we've got to, I think,
get out of the echo chamber. That was a mistake
that I think I made last year, was just not
getting out of here enough. And it's helpful
when you do.
(applause)
Senator Reid:
Mr. President, you've told me -- suggested
don't pay any attention to the blogs, don't
listen to talk radio, don't watch cable TV.
And I follow that advice pretty good.
(laughter)
Next question will be from the chair of our
Agriculture Committee, the Senator from Arkansas,
Blanche Lincoln.
Senator Lincoln:
Me, neither, Mr. President. I stay away from
the TVs and everything else. But thank you
so much for being here with us today. And
I want to thank you also -- I had an opportunity
with several of my colleagues from the House
and Senate to have a bipartisan meeting yesterday
with the First Lady on childhood obesity.
It was a great meeting and we look forward
to working with her and you and your administration
to really tackle that problem on behalf of
our children and the future of our country.
Mr. President, I come from a seventh-generation
Arkansas family. My dad was a good Democrat,
and he was a great Arkansan, and he was very
typical of Arkansans in that he was very independent-minded,
as am I, and as most of my constituents. And
he used to tell me early on when I ran for
Congress, he said it's really results that
count. And as I look at what's going on in
my state and among my constituents -- I visited
with a constituent yesterday, good Democrat,
small business owner, who was extremely frustrated
-- extremely frustrated because there was
a lack of certainty and predictability from
his government for him to be able to run his
businesses. He's -- he and his father have
worked hard, they've built three or four different
small businesses, and he fears that there's
no one in your administration that understands
what it means to go to work on Monday and
have to make a payroll on Friday. He wants
results. He wants predictability. And I think
that you're exactly right. People out there
watching us, they see us nothing more than
Democrats and Republicans up here fighting,
fighting only to win a few political points,
not to get the problem solved. And so I just
-- I want to echo I guess some of what my
colleague, Michael Bennet from Colorado, mentioned,
but also to ask you, in terms of where we
are going, what can we tell the people in
terms of predictability and certainty in getting
this economy back on track? How are we going
to do that? And are we willing as Democrats
not only to reach out to Republicans but to
push back in our own party for people who
want extremes, and look for the common ground
that's going to get us the success that we
need not only for our constituents but for
our country in this global community, in this
global economy? Are we willing as Democrats
to also push back on our own party and look
for that common ground that we need to work
with Republicans and to get the answers? And
it's really the results that are going to
count to our constituents. And we appreciate
the hard work that you put into it.
The President:
Well, the -- look, there's no doubt that this
past year has been an uncertain time for the
American people, for businesses and for people
employed by businesses. Some of that certainty
just had to do with the objective reality
of this economy entering into a freefall.
So let's just be -- let's remind ourselves
that if you've got an economy suddenly contracting
by 6 percent, or a loss of trillions of dollars
of wealth basically in the blink of an eye,
or home values descending by 20 percent, that
that's going to create a whole lot of uncertainty
out there in the business environment and
among families. And part of what we've done
over the course of this year is to put a floor
under people's feet. That's what the Recovery
Act did. That's what the interventions and
the financial markets did. It broke the back
of the recession, stabilized the markets.
Nobody is talking about a market meltdown
at this point. And people haven't recovered
all that they had lost in their 401(k)s, but
they're feeling a little better when they
open that envelope now than they did six months
ago. State budgets were in freefall; that
was stabilized. States are still going through
incredible pain, but they did not have to
lay off teachers and firefighters and cops
at the levels that they would have to otherwise
lay them off. That provided some stability
and some certainty. So the steps you've taken
as a Congress, the steps we've taken as an
administration, have helped to stabilize things.
Now, moving forward, Blanche, what you're
going to hear from some folks is that the
way to achieve even greater economic growth
-- and keep in mind the economy is now growing
at a 6 percent clip, so the question is when
do businesses actually start hiring, because
they're now making a profit -- what you're
going to start hearing is the only way to
provide stability is to go back and do what
we'd been doing before the crisis. So I noticed
yesterday when we were -- there was some hearing
about our proposal to provide additional financing
to small businesses and tax credits to small
businesses. Some of our friends on the other
side of the aisle said, "This won't help at
all. What you have to do is to make sure that
we continue the tax breaks for wealthiest
Americans. That's really what's going to make
a difference." Well, if the agenda -- if the
price of certainty is essentially for us to
adopt the exact same proposals that were in
place for eight years leading up to the biggest
economic crisis since the Great Depression
-- we don't tinker with health care, let
the insurance companies do what they want,
we don't put in place any insurance reforms,
we don't mess with the banks, let them keep
on doing what they're doing now because we
don't want to stir up Wall Street -- the result
is going to be the same. I don't know why
we would expect a different outcome pursuing
the exact same policies that got us into this
fix in the first place. Michael Bennet articulated
it very well. Part of the reason people are
feeling anxious right now, it's not just because
of this current crisis -- they've been going
through this for 10 years. They've been working
and not seeing a raise. Their costs have been
going up, their spouses going to the workforce
-- they work as hard as they can. They're
barely keeping their heads above water. They're
trying to figure out how to retire. They're
seeing more and more of their costs on health
care dumped in their lap. College tuition
skyrockets. They are more and more vulnerable,
and they have been for the last decade, treading
water. And if our response ends up being,
because we don't want to -- we don't want
to stir things up here, we're just going to
do the same thing that was being done before,
then I don't know what differentiates us from
the other guys. And I don't know why people
would say, boy, we really want to make sure
that those Democrats are in Washington fighting
for us. So the point I'm making -- and Blanche
is exactly right -- we've got to be non-ideological
about our approach to these things. We've
got to make sure that our party understands
that, like it or not, we have to have a financial
system that is healthy and functioning, so
we can't be demonizing every bank out there.
We've got to be the party of business, small
business and large business, because they
produce jobs. We've got to be in favor of
competition and exports and trade. We don't
want to be looking backwards. We can't just
go back to the New Deal and try to grab all
the same policies of the 1930s and think somehow
they'd work in the 21st century. So Blanche
is exactly right that sometimes we get ideologically
bogged down. I just want to find out what
works, and I know you do, too, and I know
the people in Arkansas do, too. But when you're
talking to the folks in Arkansas you also
have to remind them what works is not just
going back and doing the same things that
we were doing before. And, yes, there's going
to be some transition time. If we have a serious
financial regulatory reform package, will
the banks squawk? Yes. Will they say this
is the reason we're not lending? Yes. The
problem is we know right now they're not lending,
and paying out big bonuses. And we know that
the existing regulatory system doesn't work.
So we shouldn't be spooked by this notion
that, well, is now the time to take seriously
in an intelligent way, not in a knee-jerk
way, the challenge of financial regulatory
reform so that you don't have banks that are
too big to fail and you're not putting taxpayers
at risk and you're not putting the economy
at risk -- now is the time to do it. The same
is true with health care. The same is true
with health care. There are, I promise you,
at least as many small businesses out there,
if you talk to them, who will say, I just
got my bill from my health insurance and it
went up 40 percent. And we've got to do something
for them. All right?
(applause)
Senator Reid:
Next question, the junior Senator from the
state of New York, Kirsten Gillibrand.
Senator Gillibrand:
Mr. President, I have an issue I'd like to
--
The President:
Kirsten, we've got a mic for you.
Senator Gillibrand:
Thank you, Mr. President. I have an issue
I'd like to raise that is very important to
every New Yorker and to many, many Americans,
and that's health care for our 9/11 responders
and for all the communities that live near
Ground Zero. Now, these Americans hail from
every one of the 50 states and every single
congressional district in the entire United
States. And now, because of exposure to toxins
from the collapse of the World Trade Center
Towers, there's about 20,000 people who are
sick -- some of them gravely ill, suffering
from serious health effects, some are disabled,
some have died. I've introduced legislation
to provide permanent care and proper compensation
for these Americans. And my question is: Would
you today commit to working with Congress
to pass comprehensive 9/11 -- a comprehensive
9/11 health bill that's fully paid for?
The President:
Well, I fully commit to working with you guys.
Keep in mind that our budget already significantly
increased funding precisely for this purpose.
So I'm not just talking the talk; we've been
budgeting this as a top priority for the administration.
I confess, Kirsten, I have not looked at all
the details of your legislation. But I know
that not only you and Chuck, but everybody
here, wants to make sure that those who showed
such extraordinary courage and heroism during
9/11, that they are fittingly cared for, and
that's going to be something that we are going
to be very interested in working with you
on. All right?
Senator Gillibrand:
Thank you, Mr. President.
The President:
Good.
(applause)
Senator Reid:
The next question is the Chairperson of the
Environmental Public Works Committee, Senator
Barbara Boxer.
The President:
Hey, Barbara Boxer.
Senator Boxer:
Great to see you here, Mr. President. And
thanks for doing this and thanks for meeting
with the Republican caucus at the House. I
thought it was very instructive for the American
people. As Senator Feinstein and I tell our
colleagues every day, California is hurting.
I think -- I know -- that you're aware of
that. And they really want to see a fighting
spirit in us -- that we are committed, even
though we've had some political setbacks,
to get the job done. And I just want to tell
you, as I watched you during the State of
the Union, listened to you, what you are doing
now is really important to the folks that
I represent, because you're showing that fighting
spirit no matter what the adversity is, and
you're coming up with specific proposals.
So I want to ask you about small business.
We all know they're the job creators; 64 percent
of new jobs over the last 15 years came from
small business. Your new proposal, which does
mirror a couple of people -- I look at Senator
Merkley, I know Senator Warner and others,
we've worked hard on this. For community banks
to lend, can you do that by executive order?
Because my understanding is you can use some
of the TARP funds that were paid back and
use that -- or those funds that have not been
used -- can you use that and get this going
by executive order, or do you need us to put
that program into a jobs bill? And second,
are you using your influence as much as you
can to get the big banks to lend? They've
dropped lending by $12 billion over the last
year, so I wonder if you can give us an update
on that.
The President:
First of all, I've now taken trips to Allentown,
Pennsylvania; Elyria, Ohio; most recently
--
Senator Reid:
Baltimore.
The President:
I was in Baltimore.
(laughter)
Had a great time in Baltimore. Just recently
in --
Senator Reid:
Searchlight.
The President:
-- Nashua, New Hampshire. Haven't been to
Searchlight yet, but we're going to get there.
(laughter)
And everywhere I go, you talk to small business
and they will tell you they are still experiencing
a severe credit crunch. The larger businesses
right now are able to get financing. Even
the medium-size businesses, the credit markets
have improved. Smaller businesses, even if
they are making a profit and have not missed
a payment, are finding that banks are averse
to providing them capital. Now, two reasons
that they cite: One is they say their bankers
are telling them that the regulators are just
looking over their shoulder too much and so
the community banks feel that their hands
are tied. These are independent regulators.
They are diligent in doing their jobs. Obviously
they feel caught off guard because of the
lax regulation, in some cases, of the banking
industry before the financial crisis. You
get a sense that the pendulum has swung too
far in the other direction. The challenge
that we've got is we've got to be careful
because these are independent regulators and
we don't want to politicize them. But what
Treasury Secretary Geithner and others have
done is to discuss with the regulators what
we are hearing in the field and to make sure
that there is a consistency of approach that
doesn't prevent banks from making what are
good loans and taking reasonable risks. So
that's one thing we're hearing. The other
thing, though, that is still out there is
that the larger banks generally haven't been
in this market; a lot of the smaller companies
never had access to them in the first place,
and we want to actually see if we can get
more of those large banks to get into this
marketplace. And when I met with the big bank
CEOs, this was something that I pushed them
on. They tell me, and we have seen some confirmation
of this, that they are actually ramping up
some of their small business lending and setting
up more aggressive divisions actively seeking
out loans. So that's the effort that we're
making to jawbone the private sector to do
what it needs to do. In the meantime -- you
mentioned the specific proposals that we've
put forward -- I do think it's better to do
them through legislation than through executive
order. TARP was a congressionally created
structure with some fairly stringent guidelines
in terms of how we were supposed to approach
it. It shouldn't be hard to do, though. It's
a pretty simple concept. Banks have repaid
money; there's $30 billion that we could take
that has already been repaid -- immediately
apply that to a fund so that small banks are
-- community banks are able to provide their
small business customers with greater lending.
And I do think that getting that as part of
a jobs package is priority number one. And
I know I've already talked to Harry about
this -- my assumption is, is that if you combine
that with the tax credits that we've put in
place for hiring, the provisions that we talked
about to incentivize weatherization programs
that can immediately start hiring people to
retrofit homes and businesses and help reduce
our energy costs -- taking some of those immediate
steps now I think will pay some big dividends
down the road. And the timing of it is perfect,
because our job last year was to make sure
the economy was growing. The economy is now
growing. But what's happening is businesses,
either because they can't find financing or
because they're still just dipping their toe
in the water, have been hesitant to hire full-time
workers. And for us to start giving them some
serious incentives, giving them additional
access to financing, could accelerate a process
that otherwise could take a much longer time
and, frankly, all those folks out there who
are out of work right now, they just can't
afford to wait any longer -- they need it
now. All right?
Senator Reid:
We have time for one or two more questions,
if the question is short --
The President:
And the answer is short.
(laughter)
Senator Reid:
Otherwise we'll only have one question. The
Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Pat Leahy.
Senator Leahy:
Mr. President, I want to thank you for coming
here. I think this is -- thank you for coming
here. I was just whispering to Marcel these
answers are so good and need to be heard.
You have a great sense of what the federal
judiciary should be. I think back to President
Clinton's time, when the other side blocked
61 of his judges. You've had some superb judges.
You've talked to both Republicans and Democrats,
sent up some superb names. And Senator Reid
still has to file a cloture. We have to spend
a week of doing that, and then they pass by
100 to nothing or 90-10. My thing is this
-- because of what they did last time, we
end up with the greatest shortage and the
most judicial crises I think in our history.
Will you continue to work very hard to get
up names as quickly as possible, so that we
can do this, and help us get these judges
through? I don't want the same judicial crises
to occur. You've had good nominees. Can you
commit to work with us, both parties, and
keep trying to get them through?
The President:
Well, this is going to be a priority. Look,
it's not just judges, unfortunately, Pat,
it's also all our federal appointees. We've
got a huge backlog of folks who are unanimously
viewed as well qualified, nobody has a specific
objection to them, but end up having a hold
on them because of some completely unrelated
piece of business. That's an example, Michael,
of the kind of stuff that Americans just don't
understand. On the judges front, we had a
judge for the -- coming out of Indiana, Judge
Hamilton, who everybody said was outstanding
-- Evan Bayh, Democrat; Dick Lugar, Republican;
all recommended. How long did it take us?
Six months, six, seven months for somebody
who was supported by the Democratic and Republican
senator from that state. And you can multiply
that across the board. So we have to start
highlighting the fact that this is not how
we should be doing business. Now, in fairness
-- in fairness, when we were in the minority,
there were some times where we blocked judges,
we blocked appointees. I think it's fair to
say we were a little more selective in how
we did it -- "a lot more," somebody said.
(laughter)
So this is an example of where I'm going to
reach out to Mitch McConnell; I know Harry
has as well. And I'm just going to say, look,
if the government is going to work for the
American people, I can't have the administrator
for GSA, which runs every federal facility,
all federal buildings all across the country
-- here we are, we're trying to save billions
of dollars, cut waste -- Claire McCaskill
has been all on top of how can we audit our
spending -- and we could save billions of
dollars in ending old leases that don't work
or renegotiating them or consolidating buildings
and efficiencies. But I don't have a GSA administrator,
even though I nominated somebody who was well
qualified several months ago, and nobody can
tell me that there's anything particularly
wrong with her. They're blocking her because
of some unrelated matter. I don't know, you
guys may know better than I do. And that is
-- that has to end. It has to end.
(applause)
And the American people want it to end. Let's
have a fight about real stuff. Don't hold
this woman hostage. If you have an objection
about my health care policies, then let's
debate the health care policies. But don't
suddenly end up having a GSA administrator
who is stuck in limbo somewhere because you
don't like something else that we're doing,
because that doesn't serve the American people.
Then they don't know what the argument is
about. Then it's just sort of a plague on
both your houses because it looks like you
guys are just fighting all the time. And we've
got to put an end to that.
Senator Reid:
I missed somebody on my list. If you would
just be patient with us, we'll have two very
short questions.
The President:
I will indulge, Harry.
Senator Reid:
The first question is going to come from the
only person that's a member of the United
States Senate who has a spouse that's won
a Pulitzer Prize -- Sherrod Brown from Ohio.
(laughter)
Senator Brown:
Thank you for joining us. Thank you for your
visit to Lorain County, Ohio, a week and a
half ago; first presidential visit to that
county of 300,000 since Harry Truman in 1948.
The President:
It was a great visit. We had a great time.
Senator Brown:
It was terrific. Ten miles from there, Oberlin
College, one of the great private institutions
of higher learning in this country -- at Oberlin
College, there was a building built there
seven or eight years ago, fully powered by
solar panels. It's the only -- it's the largest
building on any college campus in America
like that. Those solar panels were bought
in Germany and Japan, not surprisingly -- Germany,
a country that has both an energy policy and
a manufacturing policy. Seventy-five miles
west of there is Toledo, Ohio, where you've
been several times, and Toledo has more solar
energy manufacturing -- solar manufacturing
jobs than any city in America. It begs the
question of two things in terms of manufacturing
policy and energy policy. We have all kinds
of things in so many of our states -- manufacturing
wind turbine components and solar panel components
-- but we're the only major industrial country
in the world without a manufacturing policy.
And every rich country in the world has one.
We don't. I know what you're doing with Ron
Bloom in the White House and other things,
but how do we get there? How do we -- when
we read these articles in the paper that China
is just exploding in terms of wind turbine
manufacturing and solar panel manufacturing
-- how do we rebuild our manufacturing sector
with a manufacturing policy, combined with
an energy policy that gets us there?
The President:
I hope people had a chance to read that article
that was in The New York Times I guess last
Sunday, talking about how China is not waiting,
it is moving. And already the anticipation
is, is that they will lap us when it comes
to clean energy. Now, they're not a democracy
and so they don't debate.
(laughter)
And there are no filibuster rules. And so
obviously over the long term a system that
allows for robust debate and exchange of ideas
is going to produce a better result. I believe
that. But we have to understand that when
it comes to some key issues like energy, we
are at risk of falling behind. We've already
fallen behind, but it's not irrevocable because
we still have the best research, we still
have potentially the best technology, we've
got the best universities, the best scientists,
and as I said, we've got the most productive
workers in the world. But we've got to bring
all those things together into a coherent
whole. Now, I think there are a couple of
elements to this. One, in terms of manufacturing
generally -- you just mentioned Ron Bloom,
who we put in charge of a manufacturing task
force, is just issuing now a report to me
about the direction we need to go to have
some coordination when it comes to manufacturing.
Now, this is not some big bureaucratic top-down
industrial policy; it is figuring out how
do we coordinate businesses, universities,
government, to start looking at where are
our strategic opportunities, and then making
those investments, filling holes that exist
so that we can be competitive with what China
is doing or what Germany is doing or what
Spain is doing. And my hope is, is that during
the course of this year we're going to be
able to work with all 50 senators, because
all of you have a stake in this, to just see
where are our manufacturing opportunities
and where can we fill -- plug some holes in
order to make sure that we're competitive
internationally. Specifically on clean energy,
we know that's an opportunity. I continue
to believe, and I'm not alone in this, that
the country that figures out most rapidly
new forms of energy and can commercialize
new ideas is going to lead the 21st century
economy. I think that is our growth model.
(applause)
Senator Reid:
Final question --
The President:
But -- hold on, just one last thing I want
to say about this: In order for us to maximize
it, part of it is the good work that Jeff
has been doing in terms of just finding the
right incentives. We've got to be open-minded
about a whole range of technologies. We've
got to look at clean coal technology. We've
got to look at nuclear technology. We're going
to be making some significant announcements
this year. This is an example, Blanche, of
where we can't be stuck in the past in terms
of how we see these things. We're not going
to be able to ramp up solar and wind to suddenly
replace every other energy source anytime
soon, and the economy still needs to grow.
So we've got to look at how to make existing
technologies and options better. But -- and
this is just the point that I wanted to make
because it came up in New Hampshire yesterday
-- we still -- one of the best ways to be
on the forefront in energy is to incentivize
clean energy, and discourage the old sources
or methods that aren't going to work in the
future. And so the fact that Joe Lieberman
is working with Lindsey Graham, John Kerry
has been all over this -- the three of them
are coming together to try to find a workable,
bipartisan structure so that we are incentivizing
and rewarding the future -- and understanding
that there's a transition, so that we've got
to make sure that the disruptions are minimized
as we move into this new energy future -- that's
going to be vital. So don't give up on that.
I don't want us to just say the easy way out
is for us to just give a bunch of tax credits
to clean energy companies. The market works
best when it responds to price. And if they
start seeing that, you know what, dirty energy
is a little pricier, clean energy is a little
cheaper, they will innovate, and they will
think things through in all kinds of innovative
ways. So I want to congratulate specifically
John Kerry, Joe Lieberman, and Lindsey Graham,
who it probably doesn't help him for me to
compliment him -- (laughter) -- but has been
very thoughtful in terms of how they're approaching
this issue.
Senator Reid:
Final question, Evan Bayh, Indiana.
Senator Bayh:
Thank you for being with us, Mr. President.
The President:
We can get you a mic. Nice sneakers, by the
way, Evan.
(laughter)
Senator Bayh:
Oh, thank you. You've got to stay light on
your feet around here, right?
(laughter)
Mr. President, you've already addressed this
in part, and several of the other questioners
have raised this, but I'd like to present
it in a little bit different way that I think
is on the minds of people in my state, and
perhaps in the minds of independents and moderate
Republicans and conservative Democrats around
the country -- and that's this issue of the
deficit and rising debt, and restoring the
fiscal health of this country to a position
where it ought to be. Frankly, I think the
public and average citizen have been way ahead
of the political class on this. They understand
in the long run this is unsustainable, it's
bad economics. They understand that generally
-- generationally, as Michael was mentioning,
it's unfair to our children to ask them to
pay these bills. And most of all, there's
a sense of unfairness. They're having to make
sacrifices in their daily lives, but too many
in Washington expect to have continuing increases
in the programs they care about; ordinary
citizens are making sacrifices, and yet we
want our earmarks or pet projects. And they
ask, why can't Washington make the same sacrifices
that we're willing to make? Now, I think they
realize that the other party doesn't have
much credibility on this subject. They handed
you a -- what, a $1.3 trillion deficit. Vice
President Cheney famously said that in his
opinion deficits didn't matter. He just flat
out said it. That's wrong. It's bad economics.
It's wrong. And so we've got a job to do.
But I think many people across the country
candidly look at us and say, I don't know
if the Democrats are willing to take this
on. They think we want to tax too much and
spend too much, and do we have the backbone
to really stand up and make some of these
hard decisions? Now, to your credit, you've
called for some things that aren't always
popular in our party. The first thing I noticed
when you put into effect that non-security
discretionary spending freeze is you got kicked
in the shins by some of the left-wing blogs.
And you called for more restraint on earmarks.
That's not always popular among our group,
but to your credit, you've called for those
things. So my question to you, Mr. President,
is speaking to independents, conservative
Democrats, moderate Republicans -- people
who know we have to do this -- why should
the Democratic Party be trusted? And are we
willing to make some of the tough decisions
to actually head this country in a better
direction?
The President:
Well, I'll tell you why the Democratic Party
should be trusted -- because the last time
this budget was balanced, it was under a Democratic
President who made some very tough decisions.
(applause)
I think this is pretty straightforward. Bill
Clinton made some very hard political decisions.
Some of you were there in Congress. You know
how tough those votes were. You got no help
from the other side. But as a consequence,
the economy took off and you had a $200 billion
surplus at the end of his presidency. So I
think he deserves enormous credit for that.
Those of you who took those votes deserve
enormous credit for that. That's why we've
had -- we should have credibility. But we're
still haunted by the debates that took place
from the '70s, the '60s, right? And that hasn't
completely worked through the political mindset.
So we're still saddled with this notion of
the tax-and-spend model when, if you actually
look at it, we've been very fiscally responsible.
Now, having said that, we have been complicit
in some ways over the last decade. The prescription
drug bill -- not paid for. Two wars -- not
paid for. Two tax cuts -- not paid for. The
emergence of a structural deficit that is
only going to grow because we all know that
the biggest drivers are Medicare and Medicaid,
and as people get older, as the population
gets older, and as new technologies come online,
people are demanding new services for health
care, those are going to become more and more
expensive, and that's what's going to blow
up the budget in the long term. So to answer
your question, how do we -- having said that,
there's no doubt that we've lost trust. And
part of it was just bad timing. It's like
the cartoon, right, you're sort of standing
there and somebody hands you a ticking time
bomb and it explodes, and you've got all this
gunpowder on your hands, and you didn't construct
the bomb, but you're holding it. And so what
happened last year was, we come in. You got
a $1.3 trillion deficit that we're inheriting;
you've got $3 trillion revenue that are lost
because of the recession; you've got an $8
trillion projected debt over the next 10 years;
and you've got trillions more in projected
deficits when you start looking -- counting
entitlements. Everybody has been looking at
Kent Conrad's charts here for the last several
years about it. And so at that very moment,
suddenly the headlines that people are seeing
is, "bank bailout, recovery package," and
it all kind of merges together into just this
blob of spending, and people aren't seeing,
how is this benefiting me. It just looks like
Washington business as usual. And all that
suspicion gets amplified. So it's completely
understandable. I think the way that we regain
trust is to pursue good policies but not be
afraid also to explain these policies, and
to be honest with the American people that
we're not going to dig ourselves out of this
hole overnight. So a couple of things I've
done. I have encouraged that we go back to
PAYGO, pay-as-you-go. People understand that
concept: You pay as you go. I congratulate
the Senate on voting for it. I expect the
House to get it done. I want to sign that.
Senator Reid:
Not a single Republican.
The President:
The second thing you already mentioned is
this non-defense discretionary freeze. One
thing I want to mention, though. It's not
as if we're not going after defense, as well.
It's just it would be irresponsible when we
have two wars for me to impose that same kind
of limitation, tie my hands not knowing what
contingencies may be needed. But if you look
at what Bob Gates has been doing in the Defense
Department in really going after some sacred
cows over at the Pentagon, he's been serious
about it. We've already saved billions of
dollars. We intend to keep saving billions
of dollars more on that front, as well. We've
already proposed $20 billion worth of savings
for this year by eliminating and consolidating
programs. Last year we proposed $17 billion
and we were pooh-poohed. Some of the editorials
were all, "Uh-huh, 17, this is a pittance."
You know, only in Washington is $17 billion
a pittance. But it also indicates one of the
dangers that we have, is that you've got to
chip away at this problem. So every dollar
counts. The work that Claire has done on auditing
-- if we can squeeze out $5 million here,
$10 million here, make this program work a
little bit better, over time it creates good
habits, and it starts exercising the fiscal
restraint muscles in ways that won't affect
programming for people but will affect our
bottom line. So we're moving aggressively.
We hope this year we get that stuff done.
But what we also have to understand is that
if I take all the steps that I've put forward
and Congress follows my lead on the non-defense
discretionary spending, we're prudent in terms
of defense spending, and we do all the things
that we've talked about, we've still got this
structural deficit that we've inherited. Essentially
what my proposal does is to pay for the Recovery
Act and the other extraordinary steps we had
to take for last year, so that I will have
covered what happened on my watch. That's
important to understand. Whatever spending
that I had to take that was extraordinary
that you took with me, including the Recovery
Act, if we follow my budget outline, we will
have taken care of, paid for what happened
on our watch. But what we will not have solved
is that huge structural deficit that existed
the day I walked in. And we've got to be able
to tell the truth to the American people that
that is hard to solve. And the reason it's
hard to solve is most of it is coming from
entitlements that people like. And it has
to do with the fact that there's this huge
gap between the amount of money being paid
out and the amount of money coming in. And
everybody understands this here, but I think
that there's a misperception in the public.
If you ask your average constituent where
does federal dollars go, they'll tell you
foreign aid. And you say, well, foreign aid
accounts for 1 percent of our budget. And
then they'll say, well, earmarks. Look, I
think we have to discipline ourselves on earmarks
just because symbolically I think people -- it
makes people feel like we're not showing the
same kind of discipline that they are. Even
for worthy projects you've still got to make
choices. So they're absolutely right about
that. But earmarks account for about 1 percent
of the budget. All right, so even if we eliminated
all foreign aid and all earmarks, it doesn't
solve our problem. And as far as the arguments
that our colleagues on the other side of the
aisle are making, I think it's important to
explain to people that in order for us to
balance the budget while exempting entitlements,
no new revenues, you'd have to cut non-discretionary
defense spending by 60 percent -- cut it by
60 percent. That's everything -- student loans,
NASA, veterans programs -- you name it, we'd
have to cut by 60 percent -- six, zero. That's
just not going to happen. That's why we called
for the commission, because we've got to look
at some tough, long-term policy objectives.
And that's why we've got to -- and I will
personally do this, I will say to my Republican
friends, I want to solve it. I don't want
to play politics on it, but you've got to
step up, you've got to fill these slots with
this commission that we're going to set up,
put these people in a room, and actually solve
some of these problems. And I hope they do.
And maybe I'm nave. I'm still counting,
Evan, on the notion that good policy over
the long term is good politics. If you do
the right thing, and you explain it clearly
and you do it openly, I'm confident that the
American people -- you can have an adult conversation
and say, this is not going to be easy, this
is not going to be painless, we're going to
be struggling for a while, but our future
is bright. And if we show the same grit and
determination that previous generations have
shown, I have every confidence that we are
going to have a 21st century, the American
century, just like the 20th. All right? Thank
you, everybody. God bless you.
(applause)